A few friends recommended Economix to me, so I picked it up the other
day. I was expecting not to like it, but I needed to mix some light
reading into my schedule, and blew through Economix in a few hours. I
really enjoyed it overall, but like any book, it's not without it's
problems.

Marx
~~~~

The first thing that I do when I read any layman's book about economics
is to check the index for the words "Karl Marx." It's sort of a filter;
if they don't strawman Marx, then it's probably pretty good. If they do,
then they probably suck. Note that I said 'strawman,' disagreement is
fine, I myself disagree with Marx on many things. But it's a pretty good
way to see if someone knows what they're talking about. So I'll start
there.

Good 'ol Karl is mentioned just a few times in this book, and it's
actually pretty decent. It starts off with a description of the
*Manifesto*, class struggle, and some other bits of Marxist theory.
However, we run into the first weird little thing on the bottom of page
55:

    But the workers didn't unite, and most of the 1848 revolutions
    failed. Marx fled to England with a mission: "I'll prove the
    revolution is coming! See if I don't!"

It's my current understanding that Marx didn't write *Capital* to prove
anything about the revolution; he wrote it to gain a scientific
understanding of capitalism and how it functions. However, after
thinking about it, I'm not actually sure I know enough bibliographical
information about Marx to truly say this. My gut also says bullshit on
sentences like this because of the rhetorical function that they play in
the story, which is to equivocate Marxists and Austrians, which is just
flat-out wrong. More on that later.

The next time we pick up with Marx, he's finished *Capital*, so Goodwin
explains its basic tenets. He does a pretty admirable job, but a few
caveats apply.

    Marx kept Ricardo's labor theory of value, but did ask: "If
    everything sells for its labor cost, where does **profit** come
    from?

This is hand-wavy, but hand-wavy in an important way: Marx did *not*
keep Ricardo's labor theory of value. The subtitlte of *Capital* is
'Kritik der politischen Ã–konomie', or 'a critique of political economy.'
Goodwin does a good job of mentioning that Marx was trying to critique
classical political economy (which contains Ricardo), but then
mis-handles that as well. We'll get to that, but Marx's labor theory of
value contains significant and important differences from Adam Smith and
Ricardo's theories.

    but profit comes from squeezing workers.

This is not really true. Marx made it very clear that exchange is based
in equivalence, nobody is 'cheating' the laws of exchange. Surplus value
(which Goodwin mentions appropriately) is formed from the differences
between labor-power and other commodities: labor-power is the only
commodity which can create value. This isn't the page on Capital, and
this book is supposed to be an overview, but it's still a significant
distortion of Marx's theories.

Other than this, his description of *Capital* is pretty good, and
frankly, way better than I expected when I bought this book.

Okay, next up, 'Neoclassical economics':

    But soon after *Capital* came out, economists started moving away
    from Ricardo's labor theory of value.

And for good reasons! Ricardo's theory of value wasn't developed enough,
for sure. But Marx, as I mentioned above, was also moving away from it.
Ricardo's irrelevance does not make Marx irrelevant. This is why the
comment above about the differences between their labor theories
matters. The book has an image here of Marx chasing after Marshall,
Walras, and Jevons, but in reality, they should all be walking away from
Ricardo. This lack of understanding is also played out in the further
description of Ricardo; also, lol at taking the Malthusian growth model
seriously at all.

Anyway, I have a few other things to say, but yes. In general, I think
Economix's handling of Marx is better than I expected, and I also don't
think it's fair to expect rigour in a book like this. But these kinds of
things are why, at the end, the author suggests that you go read things
on your own, and read things for yourself. Broad overviews are just
that.

Conflation of Neoliberals and Marxists
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

On page 241, he has a panel that says,

    Heck, it could be hard to say which was which.

This kind of thing really rubs me the wrong way, because they're
basically opposite, not equivalent. Yes, both use anti-state rhetoric,
but anarchists and communists care primarily about the health of the
working class, and will support 'growing the state' through social
programs and taxation until the collapse of capitalism. Austrians and
neoliberals simply care about non-interference by government, and have
no concern for anyone but themselves. See: Objectivisim. Even if their
policies hurt people, they don't care, due to the rhetoric around
bootstraps, job creators, and lazy welfare recipients.

Mischaracterization of the anti-globalization movement
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Page 245:

    We're not against globalization, we're against the **way** that it's
    happening.

The vast majority of those involved in the anti-globalization movement
were ardent anti-capitalists, and were straight-up against
globalization. Maybe there were a few liberals mixed in there that said
things like this, but invoking the black bloc and implying that they are
ultimately cool with globalization is really wrong.

What I liked
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Other than that, I really, really enjoyed this book. It presents an
overall scepticism that I really enjoyed, a focus on pragmatics over
theories, and gives an overview of economics that is in line with most
of my understanding of the field and its various players. Details are a
bit out of line, but the big pieces are all great. It was easy to read,
fun to read, and has a pretty great list of books in the back to
follow-up on.

I will certainly give a recommendation of this book to anyone who wants
to get their feet wet in the wide world of economics.

Sources and Resources
---------------------

-  Economix: How and Why Our Economy Works (and Doesn't Work), in Words
   and Pictures

