One of the things that I really appreciate about reading continental
philosophy is that it's changed the way that I read. In school I had to
read House of Leaves, and what's crazy about it is that it actually
invokes this weird performative effect. In many ways, it's a book about
reading. If you're not familiar with the book, it has three separate
stories embedded within each other, a crazy amount of citations and
footnotes, sometimes to fictional works. It slowly degenerates and
descends into madness in form as well as story. I really liked it a lot,
and it's on my 're-read' list soon.

So, anyway, when reading, say, a math textbook, you start at the
beginning. You learn what's in Chapter 1, exercise 1. Then exercise 2.
By the end of the book, congrats, you know Calculus. It's all very
straightforward and laid out straight.

But when tackling continental works, especially as a newbie, you really
need to just kinda dive in, accept that you're not really going to
understand wtf is going on, and just go with the flow. *Feel* the
writing. Get confused. *Experience* the text, don't just try to extract
the direct meanings. There's direct meaning too, of course, but it's
about images, allegories, performance, and affect, not just a
'straightforward' meaning.

What's amusing here is that this is normally interpreted as being
'vague' or 'wankery,' but it's actually often about being absolutely
exact. It's not enough to just say some words that communicate the idea,
but it's an attempt to increase the bandwidth of communication and get
across the *exact* idea, context and all. Consider a piece of music. I
could give you tablature, sheet music, or a recording. They all
communicate music in some way. But the recording also includes a
performative aspect as well as 'just the music.' You get a very specific
understanding of that piece.

There's also a connection with linguistic relativity here, where the
language of analytic philosophy constrains your abilities to think about
the problem, because the language must be a certain way. The obsession
for 'clarity' can lead to even the absurdity of turning sentences into
mathematical notation, which isn't exactly simple either. It may be
*exact* in a certain sense, but it can also be obscuring. I find some
sort of perverse joy in people taking

    The present King of France is bald.

And turning it into

1. F = "the king of France"
2. G = "is bald"
3. (∃x)[Fx & (∀y)(Fy ⊃ x=y) & Gy]

And saying that it is clearer. Obviously, to someone steeped in the
analytic tradition, it very may well be! But suggesting this is
universal is incredibly arrogant.

Deleuze also has a fantastic way of looking at this issue, in "Letter
From a Harsh Critic":

    There are, you see, two ways of reading a book: you either see it as
    a box with something inside and start looking for what it signifies,
    and then if you're even more perverse or depraved you set off after
    signifiers. And you treat the next book like a box contained in the
    first or containing it. And you annotate and interpret and question,
    and write a book about the book, and so on and on. Or there's the
    other way: you see the book as a little non-signifying machine, and
    the only question is "does it work, and how does it work?" How does
    it work for you? If it doesn't work, if nothing comes through, you
    try another book. This second way of reading's intensive: something
    comes through or doesn't. There's nothing to explain, nothing to
    understand, nothing to interpret. It's like plugging in an electric
    circuit. I know people who've read nothing who immediately saw what
    bodies without organs were, given their own "habits,'" their own way
    of being one. This second way of reading's quite different from the
    first, because it relates a book directly to what's Outside. A book
    is a little cog in much more complicated external machinery. Writing
    is one flow among others, with no special place in relation to the
    others, that comes into relations of current, countercurrent, and
    eddy with other flows-- flows of shit, sperm, words, action,
    eroticism, money, politics, and so on.

    This intensive way of reading, in contact with what's outside the
    book, as a flow meeting other flows, one machine among others, as a
    series of experiments for each reader in the midst of events that
    have nothing to do with books, as tearing the book into pieces,
    getting it to interact with other things, absolutely anything... is
    reading with love. That's exactly how you read the book. And the bit
    I like in your letter, the bit I think is rather wonderful, in fact,
    is where you say how you read the book, what you yourself did with
    it.

In fact, unless you've already read Deleuze, I bet that you didn't even
know a few of these terms, or maybe slightly confused with how they're
used. 'body without organs,' 'intensive,' 'flows,' 'machines.' How did
you deal with this when reading the few paragraphs above?

Sources and Resources
---------------------

-  House of Leaves
-  Negotiations, where "Letter From a Harsh Critic" comes from.

