Seize the Time
==============

THIS ARTICLE IS A WORK IN PROGRESS

"Seize the Time" is a book by Bobby Seale about the formation of the
Black Panther Party.

I had some folk knowledge of the Black Panther Party through activist
circles, but since I'm too young to have been alive (let alone
politically active) during the period in which the Party was active, it
was really interesting and enlightening to get a first-hand account.

"The Black Panthers"
--------------------

I had always heard the Party referred to as "The Black Panthers" and
"The Panthers" for short. There's a specific moment in the book where a
court is trying Bobby, and they receive a letter that says

\> We're watching you - The Black Panthers

Bobby remarks that he knows the letter must be fake, and probably not
from anyone actually affiliated with the Party, because if they signed
anything (which they wouldn't...), they'd sign it "The Black Panther
Party" and not "The Black Panthers." Furthermore, when referring to the
party with a shorthand form, it was always "the Party" not "the
Panthers."

I'm not totally sure of the significance of this, but it seemed
important, and also connected to my second-hand experience of the Party.

The Party and Marxism/Leninism
------------------------------

There are a few references to Mao's little red book, but other than
mentioning some of the slogans, Mao isn't really brought up. However,
Bobby does mention that the party had "Marxism/Leninism" as a basis.

I'm not sure if that's because this book is from the time period where
Mao was still around, and therefore, "Marxism/Leninism/Maoism" may not
have been something that people actually say. This deserves further
research.

The Ten Principles
------------------

While Bobby loves the term 'lumpenproletariat,' and makes references to
reading Lenin directly, it seems that the Party did a good job of
communicating with their community by not using 'complex'
Marxist/Leninst terminology. They instead wrote out their ten
principles:

    <insert principles here>

This actually allowed them to connect with the everyman 'on the block,'
as Bobby would say. This has been one of the greater failings of current
M/L/M leadership in recent years, and should serve as a lesson to us
all. Those above principles are obviously Socialist to anyone with the
correct academic background, but are placed in simple terms that people
actually understand.

Related Links
-------------

None right now.
