The Exploit
===========

THIS ARTICLE IS A WORK IN PROGRESS: Right now, this is just a summary of
the book. Detailed notes to follow someday.

"The Exploit: a theory of networks" is a book by Alex Galloway and
Eugene Thacker. It's a not-exactly-sequel to 'Protocol,' Galloway's
dissertation-turned-book.

One interesting thing about this book is that it's divided into two
large sections: "Nodes" and "Edges." There are two smaller sections,
"Prolegomenon" and "Coda", as well as an appendix. As the first few
sentences say, "It is our intention in this book to avoid the limits of
academic writing in favor of a more experimental, speculative approach."
Before we get to that, though, let's discuss the core concept of the
book: the exploit.

The Exploit
-----------

The central concept of the book, as you'd imagine, is called 'the
exploit.' it's laid out pretty clearly on page 22 what the exploit looks
like, yet gives no answer as to what the exploit actually \_is\_.

The exploit will be a tool for 'future political movements' to be
'effective.' It will be the 'antiweb,' a 'wholly new topology of
resistance' that is 'as asymmetrical in relationship to networks as the
network was in relation to power centers.'

In other words, sovereignty has discovered a way to still exist in this
networked world we find ourselves in. We thought (and many still do)
that networks would bring down all centralized power, but that war
machine has been captured by the state apparatus. So, if you can't win
on the current battlefield, the battlefield needs to be moved.

Prolegomenon
------------

Nodes
-----

The 'nodes' portion of the book is the initial part, and is constructed
of two main portions: big thesis paragraphs in italics followed by
supporting paragraphs in a more regular font. The purpose of this is
that you can just read the big portions, and get the main gist of it,
and then dive deeper into any parts that strike your fancy.

This form is interesting, as usually, it's the readers job to dig out
the main points. But there's another part that's a bit interesting, and
that's the 'difference and repetition' angle. You can also view the
'nodes' as the thesis and the supporting parts as a difference,
repeated. The difference is rooted in the level of detail: We make a
statement, then repeat it with more substance. This, combined with the
initial emphasis of italics, really serves to drive each point home.

Edges
-----

The 'edges' are more like a collection of fragments, a sea of tiny
texts. You're to read them in the same way as A Thousand Plateaus: like
a record. Bounce around, see what's interesting, dive in to some parts,
ignore the others.

There are elements of repeated difference here, as well, indicated with
I and II with identically named sections. For example, we have "Fork
Bomb I":

    #!/usr/bin/perl
    while (print fork," ") {
      exit if int rand(1.01);
    }

and "Fork Bomb II":

    #!/usr/bin/perl
    while(1) {
      if($x = not fork){
        print $x;
      } else {
        print " ";
      }
      exit if int rand(1.03);
    }

Of course, most of them are not code, but it's the same thing: repeated
difference.

Coda
----

Appendix
--------

Related Links
-------------

None right now.
