Vibrant Matter
==============

THIS ARTICLE IS A WORK IN PROGRESS: Right now, this is just a summary of
the book. Detailed notes to follow someday.

"Vibrant Matter: A political ecology of things" is a book by Jane
Bennett. I read it because it's part of the reading group for the
Cultural Studies Association's "Materialisms and Ontology" working
group.

I wasn't 100% sure what I'd find inside, but was pleasantly surprised.

As the introduction says, this book has two main points: the materialist
project, and the political project.

Vibrant Matter
--------------

"Vibrant matter" is the name Bennett gives to her materialism. I summed
it up like this:

> If Object Oriented Ontology is about turning people into things, vital
> materialism is about turning things into people.

Bennett describes a flat ontology, where objects become \_vital\_. By
this, she means that they are \_active\_, not the passivity that we
normally associate with 'things.' I think a decent example of this is a
tree: We think of trees as being mostly static, because they do things
so slowly. Looking outside my window, I see a few trees, but they aren't
really \_doing\_ anything other than blowing in the wind. But a closer
look would reveal an entire world that I'm not considering: growth is
happening, as the tree gets bigger. The photosynthesis process is
occurring in the leaves. Ants are crawling up the branches, birds are
making nests. Trees have a vital energy, even if most of the time, I
can't see it.

A Vital Politics
----------------

Bennett follows a Deleuzian path towards a politics: relentless
positivity. In fact, this is the main difference between Bennett and
other OOO theorists: Speculative Realism is a philosophy of
\_ressentiment\_ in my eyes. It follows a slave morality:
"Correlationism is bad, therefore, I am good." Bennett, on the other
hand, wants to bring back "childhood experiences of a world populated by
animate things rather than passive objects... to awaken what Henri
Bergson described as 'a latent belief in the spontaneity of nature.'"

Basically, if, to use my description, "objects are people," don't they
then deserve the same respect and consideration that people do when we
make decisions? Shouldn't they be consulted when something interacts
with them?

Related Links
-------------

<a href="http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0822346338/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=0822346338&linkCode=as2&tag=stesblo026-20">Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things" on Amazon</a><img src="http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=stesblo026-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0822346338" width="1" height="1" border="0" alt="" style="border:none !important; margin:0px !important;" />

